README.md, before:

# haive - Development Environment Manager

A standalone tool for managing Docker Compose-based development projects. Provides TUI, MCP server, and CLI interfaces for database operations and git worktree management.

## Installation

### Option 1: Install from Source (Recommended for Development)

```bash
git clone https://github.com/mkrowiarz/mcp-symfony-stack.git
cd mcp-symfony-stack
make install
```

Binary is installed to `$HOME/go/bin/haive`. Add to PATH if needed:

**Bash**: `export PATH="$HOME/go/bin:$PATH"`

**Fish**: `set -gx PATH $HOME/go/bin $PATH`

### Option 2: Install to ~/.local/bin

```bash
git clone https://github.com/mkrowiarz/mcp-symfony-stack.git
cd mcp-symfony-stack
make install-local
```

Binary is installed to `~/.local/bin/haive`. Make sure `~/.local/bin` is in your PATH.

### Option 3: Install Latest Release

```bash
go install github.com/mkrowiarz/mcp-symfony-stack/cmd/haive@latest
```

Binary is installed to `$HOME/go/bin/haive`.

### Option 4: Manual Build

```bash
git clone https://github.com/mkrowiarz/mcp-symfony-stack.git
cd mcp-symfony-stack
go build -o haive ./cmd/haive

# Move to system PATH
sudo mv haive /usr/local/bin/
# Or to user-local bin
mkdir -p ~/.local/bin && mv haive ~/.local/bin/
```

## Quick Start

```bash
# Initialize config for your project (preview)
cd /path/to/your/project
haive init

# Write config directly to .haive.toml
haive init --write

# Switch to a branch with automatic database switching
haive checkout feature/pf-1234-demo --create

# Just switch database for current branch
haive switch

# Run interactive TUI
haive

# Or use as MCP server for Claude Code
haive --mcp
```

## Configuration

Haive uses a TOML configuration file named `.haive.toml` in your project root.

### Minimal Config (`.haive.toml`)

```toml
[project]
name = "my-project"
preset = "symfony"

[docker]
compose_files = ["docker-compose.yaml"]
```

### Full Config Example (`.haive.toml`)

```toml
[project]
name = "my-project"
preset = "symfony"

[docker]
compose_files = [
  "compose.yaml",
  "docker/dev/compose/compose.app.yaml",
  "docker/dev/compose/compose.database.yaml"
]

[database]
service = "database"
dsn = "${DATABASE_URL}"
allowed = ["myapp", "myapp_*"]
dumps_path = "var/dumps"

[database.hooks]
postClone = ["./scripts/seed.sh"]
preDrop = ["./scripts/backup.sh"]

[worktree]
base_path = ".worktrees"
db_per_worktree = true

[worktree.copy]
include = [".env.local", "config/**/*.yaml"]
exclude = ["vendor/", "node_modules/"]

[worktree.hooks]
postCreate = ["composer install", "npm install"]
preRemove = ["./scripts/cleanup.sh"]

[worktree.env]
file = ".env.local"
var_name = "DATABASE_URL"
```

**Note:** `database.allowed` is required when the database section is present. Use glob patterns like `["app", "app_*"]` to specify which databases can be operated on.

## Worktree Features

### File Copy Patterns

When creating a worktree, you can automatically copy files from the main project using glob patterns:

```toml
[worktree.copy]
include = [".env.local", "config/**/*.yaml", "secrets/**/*"]
exclude = ["vendor/", "node_modules/", "*.log"]
```

- `include`: Files to copy (supports `**` for recursive matching)
- `exclude`: Patterns to skip (applied after include)

Common use cases:
- Copy `.env.local` for local environment settings
- Copy config files that shouldn't be in git
- Copy secrets or certificates

### Worktree Hooks

Run commands at key points in the worktree lifecycle:

```toml
[worktree.hooks]
postCreate = ["composer install", "npm install", "echo 'Worktree ready!'"]
preRemove = ["./scripts/backup-worktree-data.sh"]
postRemove = ["echo 'Worktree removed'"]
```

**Environment variables available to hooks:**
- `REPO_ROOT` - Path to main repository
- `PROJECT_NAME` - Project name from config
- `WORKTREE_PATH` - Path to the worktree
- `WORKTREE_NAME` - Name of the worktree
- `BRANCH` - Git branch name

**Hook behavior:**
- `postCreate`: Runs after git worktree add completes. Failures are logged as warnings.
- `preRemove`: Runs before removing worktree. Non-zero exit prevents removal.
- `postRemove`: Runs after worktree removed. Failures are logged as warnings.

### Database Per Worktree

Automatically manage separate databases for each worktree:

```toml
[worktree]
base_path = ".worktrees"
db_per_worktree = true

[worktree.env]
file = ".env.local"
var_name = "DATABASE_URL"
```

When a worktree is created:
1. Database name is tracked in git config (`haive.database`)
2. `.env.local` is automatically updated with worktree-specific `DATABASE_URL`

### Database Hooks

Run commands during database operations:

```toml
[database.hooks]
postClone = ["./scripts/seed-database.sh"]
preDrop = ["./scripts/backup-before-drop.sh"]
```

**Environment variables available to database hooks:**
- `REPO_ROOT`, `PROJECT_NAME`
- `DATABASE_NAME` - The database being operated on
- `DATABASE_URL` - Full connection URL
- `SOURCE_DATABASE` - Source DB (for clone operations)
- `TARGET_DATABASE` - Target DB (for clone operations)

**Hook behavior:**
- `postClone`: Runs after successful database clone. Failures are logged as warnings.
- `preDrop`: Runs before dropping database. Non-zero exit prevents the drop.

### Configuration Fields

| Field | Required | Description |
|-------|----------|-------------|
| `project.name` | Yes | Project name for display |
| `project.preset` | Yes | Project preset: `symfony`, `laravel`, `generic` |
| `docker.compose_files` | Yes | Array of compose file paths (relative to project root) |
| `database.service` | If database section exists | Docker Compose service name |
| `database.dsn` | If database section exists | Database URL (supports `${VAR}` interpolation) |
| `database.allowed` | If database section exists | Glob patterns for allowed databases (e.g., `["app", "app_*"]`) |
| `database.dumps_path` | No | Directory for SQL dumps (default: `var/dumps`) |
| `database.hooks.postClone` | No | Commands to run after database clone |
| `database.hooks.preDrop` | No | Commands to run before database drop (can prevent drop) |
| `worktree.base_path` | If worktree section exists | Directory for worktrees |
| `worktree.db_per_worktree` | No | Auto-create database per worktree |
| `worktree.copy.include` | No | File patterns to copy when creating worktree (glob, `**` supported) |
| `worktree.copy.exclude` | No | Patterns to exclude from copy |
| `worktree.hooks.postCreate` | No | Commands to run after worktree creation |
| `worktree.hooks.preRemove` | No | Commands to run before worktree removal (can prevent removal) |
| `worktree.hooks.postRemove` | No | Commands to run after worktree removal |
| `worktree.env.file` | No | Env file to update with worktree database (e.g., `.env.local`) |
| `worktree.env.var_name` | No | Variable name to set (e.g., `DATABASE_URL`) |

### Environment Variables

Config values support `${VAR_NAME}` syntax, resolved from:
1. OS environment
2. `.env.local`
3. `.env`

## MCP Server Setup

MCP servers are configured in `.claude/mcp.json` files.

**Option 1: Global** (~/.claude/mcp.json) - applies to all projects:

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "haive": {
      "command": "haive",
      "args": ["--mcp"]
    }
  }
}
```

If `haive` is not in PATH, use the full path: `"command": "/home/user/go/bin/haive"`.

**Option 2: Project-specific** (/path/to/project/.claude/mcp.json) - only for this project:

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "haive": {
      "command": "haive",
      "args": ["--mcp"]
    }
  }
}
```

Project-specific config is loaded in addition to (not instead of) global config.

**Note:** MCP servers are configured in `mcp.json`, not `settings.local.json`. The `settings.local.json` file is for other settings like `approvedCommandPatterns` and permission modes.

### Available MCP Tools

- `project_info` - Get project configuration and status
- `project_init` - Generate suggested configuration
- `worktree_list` - List git worktrees
- `worktree_create` - Create a worktree
- `worktree_remove` - Remove a worktree
- `db_list` - List databases
- `db_dump` - Dump database to SQL file
- `db_import` - Import SQL file into database
- `db_create` - Create empty database
- `db_drop` - Drop database
- `db_clone` - Clone database
- `db_dumps_list` - List available dump files
- `workflow_create_isolated_worktree` - Create worktree with optional database
- `workflow_remove_isolated_worktree` - Remove worktree with optional database cleanup

## TUI Keyboard Shortcuts

Press `?` in TUI to see all shortcuts.

| Key | Action |
|-----|--------|
| `Tab`/`Shift+Tab` | Cycle panes |
| `1-4` | Jump to pane |
| `j`/`k` or arrows | Navigate items |
| `n` | New worktree (pane 2) |
| `o` | Open worktree in terminal (pane 2) |
| `x` | Remove worktree / Drop database / Delete dump |
| `d` | Dump database (pane 3) |
| `c` | Clone database (pane 3) |
| `i` | Import dump (pane 4) |
| `r` | Refresh current pane |
| `R` | Refresh all panes |
| `q` | Quit |

## Safety Guards

- Default database (from DSN) cannot be dropped
- `database.allowed` restricts which databases can be operated on (required when database section is present)
- Path traversal attempts are blocked for worktrees

## CLI Commands

### `haive checkout <branch>` - Switch branch with database

Switches to a git branch and automatically switches to the corresponding database.

```bash
# Checkout existing branch and its database
haive checkout feature/my-feature

# Create new branch with new database
haive checkout feature/new-feature --create

# Create branch and clone data from specific database
haive checkout feature/demo --create --clone-from=symfony
```

**Database naming:** Branch `feature/pf-1234-demo` gets database `symfony_feature_pf_1234_demo` (based on your default DB name).

### `haive switch` - Switch database for current branch

Switches the database for your current branch without changing git branches.

```bash
# Switch to database for current branch
haive switch

# Switch and clone from specific database
haive switch --clone-from=symfony
```

**Automatic behavior:**
- On `main` or `master`: uses the default database
- On feature branches: creates/uses `<default_db>_<branch_name>`
- If database doesn't exist: automatically creates it
- If feature branch: automatically clones from default database

### `haive worktree` - Manage git worktrees

List, create, and remove git worktrees from the command line.

```bash
# Show help
haive worktree --help

# List all worktrees
haive worktree list
haive wt ls

# Create worktree for existing branch
haive worktree create feature/my-feature
haive wt create feature/my-feature

# Create worktree with new branch
haive worktree create feature/new-feature --new-branch
haive wt add feature/new-feature -n

# Remove worktree
haive worktree remove feature/my-feature
haive wt rm feature/my-feature
```

**Note:** Worktree commands require the `worktree` section in your config. See [Worktree Features](#worktree-features) for advanced configuration (file copying, hooks, database per worktree).

### `haive serve` - Run app container for worktrees

Start and stop the app container for a worktree with isolated dependencies. Designed for OrbStack environments where each container gets automatic DNS (`.orb.local`).

```bash
# From within a worktree directory
cd .worktrees/feature-my-feature

# Start the app container
haive serve

# Stop the app container
haive serve stop
```

**How it works:**
1. Detects you're in a worktree (checks `.git` file format)
2. Looks for `compose.worktree.yaml` in the worktree root
3. Starts container with unique project name: `<project>-wt-<branch>`
4. Returns OrbStack hostname: `<project>-wt-<branch>-app.orb.local`

**Setup: Create `compose.worktree.yaml` in each worktree**

This file customizes how the app runs for this specific worktree:

```yaml
services:
  app:
    # No port mapping - OrbStack provides automatic hostname
    ports: []

    # Isolate dependencies from other worktrees/main
    volumes:
      - .:/app:delegated
      - /app/var/cache       # Isolated cache
      - /app/vendor          # Isolated vendor/
      - /app/node_modules    # Isolated node_modules (optional)
      - ~/.composer/auth.json:/root/.config/composer/auth.json

    # Override environment for this worktree
    environment:
      # Example: Use worktree-specific database
      DATABASE_URL: "mysql://user:pass@db:3306/myapp_wt_feature_x"
      TZ: 'Europe/Berlin'

# Connect to shared services (db, redis, etc.) from main project
networks:
  pf-network:
    external: true
    name: professionfit-symfony_pf-network
  local:
    external: true
    name: professionfit-symfony_local
```

**Network names:** Update `professionfit-symfony` to match your main project's Docker Compose project name. Check with: `docker network ls`

**Dependencies:** Run `composer install` and `npm install` in the worktree before starting the container. The isolated volumes ensure each worktree has its own dependencies.

**Why separate dependencies?**
- Branches may require different package versions
- Prevents conflicts between worktrees
- Avoids breaking main project when testing experimental packages

## Troubleshooting

### "Dump failed" or "Import failed" errors

If you see errors mentioning `mysqldump: [Warning] Using a password...`, this is a MySQL warning that was being captured into the SQL output. This has been fixed - update to the latest version.

### Config not found

Haive looks for `.haive.toml` in your project root.

### Database operations fail with "not in allowed list"

The `database.allowed` field is required when the database section is present. It specifies which databases can be operated on for safety:

```toml
[database]
allowed = ["myapp", "myapp_*"]
```

## Supported Databases

- MySQL (port 3306)
- MariaDB (detected via `serverVersion` query param)
- PostgreSQL (port 5432)

Commit message:

feat: add configurable [serve] section for docker compose management
Add [serve] config section to specify compose files for 'haive serve' command.
This replaces the hardcoded compose.worktree.yaml approach with a flexible
configuration-based solution.

Changes:
- Add Serve type with compose_files field to config
- Update Serve() and Stop() commands to use configured compose files
- Remove hardcoded compose.worktree.yaml and docker-compose.yml references
- Add clear error messages when [serve] is not configured
- Update CLI help to show configuration example
- Update README.md with serve command documentation

Example config:
[serve]
compose_files = [docker-compose.yml, compose.worktree.yaml]

README.md, after:

# haive - Development Environment Manager

A standalone tool for managing Docker Compose-based development projects. Provides TUI, MCP server, and CLI interfaces for database operations and git worktree management.

## Installation

### Option 1: Install from Source (Recommended for Development)

```bash
git clone https://github.com/mkrowiarz/mcp-symfony-stack.git
cd mcp-symfony-stack
make install
```

Binary is installed to `$HOME/go/bin/haive`. Add to PATH if needed:

**Bash**: `export PATH="$HOME/go/bin:$PATH"`

**Fish**: `set -gx PATH $HOME/go/bin $PATH`

### Option 2: Install to ~/.local/bin

```bash
git clone https://github.com/mkrowiarz/mcp-symfony-stack.git
cd mcp-symfony-stack
make install-local
```

Binary is installed to `~/.local/bin/haive`. Make sure `~/.local/bin` is in your PATH.

### Option 3: Install Latest Release

```bash
go install github.com/mkrowiarz/mcp-symfony-stack/cmd/haive@latest
```

Binary is installed to `$HOME/go/bin/haive`.

### Option 4: Manual Build

```bash
git clone https://github.com/mkrowiarz/mcp-symfony-stack.git
cd mcp-symfony-stack
go build -o haive ./cmd/haive

# Move to system PATH
sudo mv haive /usr/local/bin/
# Or to user-local bin
mkdir -p ~/.local/bin && mv haive ~/.local/bin/
```

## Quick Start

```bash
# Initialize config for your project (preview)
cd /path/to/your/project
haive init

# Write config directly to .haive.toml
haive init --write

# Switch to a branch with automatic database switching
haive checkout feature/pf-1234-demo --create

# Just switch database for current branch
haive switch

# Run interactive TUI
haive

# Or use as MCP server for Claude Code
haive --mcp
```

## Configuration

Haive uses a TOML configuration file named `.haive.toml` in your project root.

### Minimal Config (`.haive.toml`)

```toml
[project]
name = "my-project"
preset = "symfony"

[docker]
compose_files = ["docker-compose.yaml"]
```

### Full Config Example (`.haive.toml`)

```toml
[project]
name = "my-project"
preset = "symfony"

[docker]
compose_files = [
  "compose.yaml",
  "docker/dev/compose/compose.app.yaml",
  "docker/dev/compose/compose.database.yaml"
]

[database]
service = "database"
dsn = "${DATABASE_URL}"
allowed = ["myapp", "myapp_*"]
dumps_path = "var/dumps"

[database.hooks]
postClone = ["./scripts/seed.sh"]
preDrop = ["./scripts/backup.sh"]

[worktree]
base_path = ".worktrees"
db_per_worktree = true

[worktree.copy]
include = [".env.local", "config/**/*.yaml"]
exclude = ["vendor/", "node_modules/"]

[worktree.hooks]
postCreate = ["composer install", "npm install"]
preRemove = ["./scripts/cleanup.sh"]

[worktree.env]
file = ".env.local"
var_name = "DATABASE_URL"

[serve]
compose_files = ["docker-compose.yml", "compose.worktree.yaml"]
```

**Note:** `database.allowed` is required when the database section is present. Use glob patterns like `["app", "app_*"]` to specify which databases can be operated on.

## Worktree Features

### File Copy Patterns

When creating a worktree, you can automatically copy files from the main project using glob patterns:

```toml
[worktree.copy]
include = [".env.local", "config/**/*.yaml", "secrets/**/*"]
exclude = ["vendor/", "node_modules/", "*.log"]
```

- `include`: Files to copy (supports `**` for recursive matching)
- `exclude`: Patterns to skip (applied after include)

Common use cases:
- Copy `.env.local` for local environment settings
- Copy config files that shouldn't be in git
- Copy secrets or certificates

### Worktree Hooks

Run commands at key points in the worktree lifecycle:

```toml
[worktree.hooks]
postCreate = ["composer install", "npm install", "echo 'Worktree ready!'"]
preRemove = ["./scripts/backup-worktree-data.sh"]
postRemove = ["echo 'Worktree removed'"]
```

**Environment variables available to hooks:**
- `REPO_ROOT` - Path to main repository
- `PROJECT_NAME` - Project name from config
- `WORKTREE_PATH` - Path to the worktree
- `WORKTREE_NAME` - Name of the worktree
- `BRANCH` - Git branch name

**Hook behavior:**
- `postCreate`: Runs after git worktree add completes. Failures are logged as warnings.
- `preRemove`: Runs before removing worktree. Non-zero exit prevents removal.
- `postRemove`: Runs after worktree removed. Failures are logged as warnings.

### Database Per Worktree

Automatically manage separate databases for each worktree:

```toml
[worktree]
base_path = ".worktrees"
db_per_worktree = true

[worktree.env]
file = ".env.local"
var_name = "DATABASE_URL"
```

When a worktree is created:
1. Database name is tracked in git config (`haive.database`)
2. `.env.local` is automatically updated with worktree-specific `DATABASE_URL`

### Serve Command

Manage Docker containers for worktrees using configured compose files:

```bash
# Start containers for current worktree
haive serve

# Stop containers for current worktree  
haive serve stop
```

**Configuration:**

```toml
[serve]
compose_files = ["docker-compose.yml", "compose.worktree.yaml"]
```

- `compose_files`: Array of compose files to use with `docker compose up -d`
- All files are passed with `-f` flags in order
- If `[serve]` is not configured, the command will error with instructions

### Database Hooks

Run commands during database operations:

```toml
[database.hooks]
postClone = ["./scripts/seed-database.sh"]
preDrop = ["./scripts/backup-before-drop.sh"]
```

**Environment variables available to database hooks:**
- `REPO_ROOT`, `PROJECT_NAME`
- `DATABASE_NAME` - The database being operated on
- `DATABASE_URL` - Full connection URL
- `SOURCE_DATABASE` - Source DB (for clone operations)
- `TARGET_DATABASE` - Target DB (for clone operations)

**Hook behavior:**
- `postClone`: Runs after successful database clone. Failures are logged as warnings.
- `preDrop`: Runs before dropping database. Non-zero exit prevents the drop.

### Configuration Fields

| Field | Required | Description |
|-------|----------|-------------|
| `project.name` | Yes | Project name for display |
| `project.preset` | Yes | Project preset: `symfony`, `laravel`, `generic` |
| `docker.compose_files` | Yes | Array of compose file paths (relative to project root) |
| `database.service` | If database section exists | Docker Compose service name |
| `database.dsn` | If database section exists | Database URL (supports `${VAR}` interpolation) |
| `database.allowed` | If database section exists | Glob patterns for allowed databases (e.g., `["app", "app_*"]`) |
| `database.dumps_path` | No | Directory for SQL dumps (default: `var/dumps`) |
| `database.hooks.postClone` | No | Commands to run after database clone |
| `database.hooks.preDrop` | No | Commands to run before database drop (can prevent drop) |
| `worktree.base_path` | If worktree section exists | Directory for worktrees |
| `worktree.db_per_worktree` | No | Auto-create database per worktree |
| `worktree.copy.include` | No | File patterns to copy when creating worktree (glob, `**` supported) |
| `worktree.copy.exclude` | No | Patterns to exclude from copy |
| `worktree.hooks.postCreate` | No | Commands to run after worktree creation |
| `worktree.hooks.preRemove` | No | Commands to run before worktree removal (can prevent removal) |
| `worktree.hooks.postRemove` | No | Commands to run after worktree removal |
| `worktree.env.file` | No | Env file to update with worktree database (e.g., `.env.local`) |
| `worktree.env.var_name` | No | Variable name to set (e.g., `DATABASE_URL`) |
| `serve.compose_files` | If serve section exists | Array of compose files for `haive serve` command |

### Environment Variables

Config values support `${VAR_NAME}` syntax, resolved from:
1. OS environment
2. `.env.local`
3. `.env`

## MCP Server Setup

MCP servers are configured in `.claude/mcp.json` files.

**Option 1: Global** (~/.claude/mcp.json) - applies to all projects:

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "haive": {
      "command": "haive",
      "args": ["--mcp"]
    }
  }
}
```

If `haive` is not in PATH, use the full path: `"command": "/home/user/go/bin/haive"`.

**Option 2: Project-specific** (/path/to/project/.claude/mcp.json) - only for this project:

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "haive": {
      "command": "haive",
      "args": ["--mcp"]
    }
  }
}
```

Project-specific config is loaded in addition to (not instead of) global config.

**Note:** MCP servers are configured in `mcp.json`, not `settings.local.json`. The `settings.local.json` file is for other settings like `approvedCommandPatterns` and permission modes.

### Available MCP Tools

- `project_info` - Get project configuration and status
- `project_init` - Generate suggested configuration
- `worktree_list` - List git worktrees
- `worktree_create` - Create a worktree
- `worktree_remove` - Remove a worktree
- `db_list` - List databases
- `db_dump` - Dump database to SQL file
- `db_import` - Import SQL file into database
- `db_create` - Create empty database
- `db_drop` - Drop database
- `db_clone` - Clone database
- `db_dumps_list` - List available dump files
- `workflow_create_isolated_worktree` - Create worktree with optional database
- `workflow_remove_isolated_worktree` - Remove worktree with optional database cleanup

## TUI Keyboard Shortcuts

Press `?` in TUI to see all shortcuts.

| Key | Action |
|-----|--------|
| `Tab`/`Shift+Tab` | Cycle panes |
| `1-4` | Jump to pane |
| `j`/`k` or arrows | Navigate items |
| `n` | New worktree (pane 2) |
| `o` | Open worktree in terminal (pane 2) |
| `x` | Remove worktree / Drop database / Delete dump |
| `d` | Dump database (pane 3) |
| `c` | Clone database (pane 3) |
| `i` | Import dump (pane 4) |
| `r` | Refresh current pane |
| `R` | Refresh all panes |
| `q` | Quit |

## Safety Guards

- Default database (from DSN) cannot be dropped
- `database.allowed` restricts which databases can be operated on (required when database section is present)
- Path traversal attempts are blocked for worktrees

## CLI Commands

### `haive checkout <branch>` - Switch branch with database

Switches to a git branch and automatically switches to the corresponding database.

```bash
# Checkout existing branch and its database
haive checkout feature/my-feature

# Create new branch with new database
haive checkout feature/new-feature --create

# Create branch and clone data from specific database
haive checkout feature/demo --create --clone-from=symfony
```

**Database naming:** Branch `feature/pf-1234-demo` gets database `symfony_feature_pf_1234_demo` (based on your default DB name).

### `haive switch` - Switch database for current branch

Switches the database for your current branch without changing git branches.

```bash
# Switch to database for current branch
haive switch

# Switch and clone from specific database
haive switch --clone-from=symfony
```

**Automatic behavior:**
- On `main` or `master`: uses the default database
- On feature branches: creates/uses `<default_db>_<branch_name>`
- If database doesn't exist: automatically creates it
- If feature branch: automatically clones from default database

### `haive worktree` - Manage git worktrees

List, create, and remove git worktrees from the command line.

```bash
# Show help
haive worktree --help

# List all worktrees
haive worktree list
haive wt ls

# Create worktree for existing branch
haive worktree create feature/my-feature
haive wt create feature/my-feature

# Create worktree with new branch
haive worktree create feature/new-feature --new-branch
haive wt add feature/new-feature -n

# Remove worktree
haive worktree remove feature/my-feature
haive wt rm feature/my-feature
```

**Note:** Worktree commands require the `worktree` section in your config. See [Worktree Features](#worktree-features) for advanced configuration (file copying, hooks, database per worktree).

### `haive serve` - Run app container for worktrees

Start and stop the app container for a worktree with isolated dependencies. Designed for OrbStack environments where each container gets automatic DNS (`.orb.local`).

```bash
# From within a worktree directory
cd .worktrees/feature-my-feature

# Start the app container
haive serve

# Stop the app container
haive serve stop
```

**How it works:**
1. Detects you're in a worktree (checks `.git` file format)
2. Looks for `compose.worktree.yaml` in the worktree root
3. Starts container with unique project name: `<project>-wt-<branch>`
4. Returns OrbStack hostname: `<project>-wt-<branch>-app.orb.local`

**Setup: Create `compose.worktree.yaml` in each worktree**

This file customizes how the app runs for this specific worktree:

```yaml
services:
  app:
    # No port mapping - OrbStack provides automatic hostname
    ports: []

    # Isolate dependencies from other worktrees/main
    volumes:
      - .:/app:delegated
      - /app/var/cache       # Isolated cache
      - /app/vendor          # Isolated vendor/
      - /app/node_modules    # Isolated node_modules (optional)
      - ~/.composer/auth.json:/root/.config/composer/auth.json

    # Override environment for this worktree
    environment:
      # Example: Use worktree-specific database
      DATABASE_URL: "mysql://user:pass@db:3306/myapp_wt_feature_x"
      TZ: 'Europe/Berlin'

# Connect to shared services (db, redis, etc.) from main project
networks:
  pf-network:
    external: true
    name: professionfit-symfony_pf-network
  local:
    external: true
    name: professionfit-symfony_local
```

**Network names:** Update `professionfit-symfony` to match your main project's Docker Compose project name. Check with: `docker network ls`

**Dependencies:** Run `composer install` and `npm install` in the worktree before starting the container. The isolated volumes ensure each worktree has its own dependencies.

**Why separate dependencies?**
- Branches may require different package versions
- Prevents conflicts between worktrees
- Avoids breaking main project when testing experimental packages

## Troubleshooting

### "Dump failed" or "Import failed" errors

If you see errors mentioning `mysqldump: [Warning] Using a password...`, this is a MySQL warning that was being captured into the SQL output. This has been fixed - update to the latest version.

### Config not found

Haive looks for `.haive.toml` in your project root.

### Database operations fail with "not in allowed list"

The `database.allowed` field is required when the database section is present. It specifies which databases can be operated on for safety:

```toml
[database]
allowed = ["myapp", "myapp_*"]
```

## Supported Databases

- MySQL (port 3306)
- MariaDB (detected via `serverVersion` query param)
- PostgreSQL (port 5432)
